---
title: If, by Rudyard Kipling
tags: Poem
---
I
---
If you can keep your head when all about you;<br/>
Are losing theirs and blaming it on you;

If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,

But make allowance for their doubting too; 

If you can wait and not be tired by waiting, 

Or, being lied about, don't deal in lies, 

Or, being hated, don't give way to hating,

And yet don't look too good, nor talk too wise; 


II
---
<br  />
If you can dream - and not make dreams your master;

If you can think - and not make thoughts your aim; 

If you can meet with triumph and disaster 

And treat those two imposters just the same; 

If you can bear to hear the truth you've spoken 

Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools, 

Or watch the things you gave your life to broken, 

And stoop and build 'em up with wornout tools; 

III
---
<br  />
If you can make one heap of all your winnings 

And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss, 

And lose, and start again at your beginnings 

And never breath a word about your loss; 

If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew 

To serve your turn long after they are gone, 

And so hold on when there is nothing in you 

Except the Will which says to them: "Hold on"; 

IV
---
<br  />
If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue, 

Or walk with kings - nor lose the common touch;

If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you; 

If all men count with you, but none too much; 

If you can fill the unforgiving minute  With sixty seconds' worth of distance run - 

Yours is the Earth and everything that's in it,

And - which is more - you'll be a Man my son! 

Personal note
---
"If"  was a poem by Rudyard Kipling, India-born British poet, written in 1895.<br/>
Do you have a piece of poetry that really resonates with you?  I consider this my sacred text after the Bible. Maybe because it feels like a guidance how to be a Good man,  a reminder not to stray from my values. Most of the line deals with self-control in hard times. A guidance to really keeping it together when things are bad, being doubted, betrayed, unfortunate, and loss.

<br/>
I found this poem when I was in college. I was really in a bad position, I was confused and helpless. I don't have anybody trustworthy enough to tell my stories or to ask for guidance.  So when I found this, I feel like it really  speaks to me. A voice that told me to keep my chin up and keep walking straight, to persevere and do things what is right. To let go what I lose and never cling too much about it.<br/>

<br/>
It brings a great comfort and encouragement every time I read it. I used to read it aloud, heck , at one point I'm able to memorize the whole verses. I write it on my wall, I keep it in my notes. It's such an important piece to me that I plan to recite this to my future kids when they grow up. This will be a part of my family.

---
